Egypt explosion: Tourists on bus injured near Giza pyramids
19 May 2019
Share
Media captionBomb targets tourist bus in Egypt
An explosion targeting a tourist bus has injured at least 16 people near the Grand Egyptian Museum, next to the pyramids in Giza.

South African tourists are among the injured. Most of those hurt suffered minor injuries, while three were treated in hospital, officials say.

A device went off close to the museum fence as the bus was passing.

It is not yet known who was behind the bombing but Islamist militants have attacked tourists in Egypt in the past.

In December, three Vietnamese tourists and a local tour guide were killed after a roadside bomb hit their bus.

Deadly blast hits tour bus in Egypt
Country profile
What do we know about the blast?
A witness, Mohamed el-Mandouh, told Reuters news agency he had heard a "very loud explosion" while sitting in traffic near the site of the blast, which is close to the capital Cairo.

The blast hit the bus which was carrying 28 passengers, Egyptian Tourism Minister Rania A Al Mashat said.

Images taken after police cordoned the bus show a vehicle with windows blown out or shattered, and glass littering the aisle inside.

A private car was also damaged behind the bus.

Image caption
Broken glass lay on the floor of the bus after the blast
According to state-run broadcaster Nile News TV, the bus was carrying 25 South African tourists and a security source confirmed for Reuters that South Africans had been aboard.

Seven South African tourists and 10 Egyptian civilians were injured, Nile News TV says.

The tourism minister said all of the people affected by the blast were being "fully supported in their onward travels".

Critical time for tourism industry
By Sally Nabil, BBC News, Cairo

Egyptian officials hurried to confirm everything is under control. No life-threatening injuries, all the wounded in a stable condition, and no damage caused to the strategic tourist site. They wanted to send a clear message of assurance.

But it's the second explosion in nearly six months near Egypt's most important landmark, the Great Pyramids, and once again questions are raised about how adequate security measures are in such a strategic location.

The blast took place a few hundred metres away from the Grand Egyptian Museum, due to open next year. Officials confirm no damage was caused to the museum, expected to house the country's top antiquities.

The timing of the explosion is quite critical. Egypt is getting ready to host the African Cup of Nations for football (Afcon) next month.

Furthermore, the tourism industry, a lifeline to the struggling Egyptian economy, recently started to recover. Recent official figures show that growth rates are on the rise and tourists are coming back. This vital sector was hit hard in 2015 when a Russian plane was downed over the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, with 224 people on board killed.

So the message behind this recent attack may be discouraging. No tourist comes to Cairo without visiting the Great Pyramids, and perhaps some of them might think twice now before heading to this historic site.

***********

The islands turning the tide electric
The Orkney islands are the ideal place to experiment with new energy technologies, thanks to its unique landscape.

16 May 2019
Orkney, a remote archipelago off the north coast of Scotland, is harnessing the power of its tides. Completely surrounded by ocean and continuously battered by waves up to 13m (43ft) high, the residents of the islands are now finding a new way to work with the waves.

It¡¯s the perfect location to test out new, renewable energy solutions, such as wind, wave and tidal energy. To do so, a floating tidal turbine draws energy from the movement of the sea, and then converts it to electricity.

¡°The principle behind it is much like wind turbines on land. In a wind turbine, the blades are being moved by the wind, whereas in our tidal turbine this sea water is moving blades and turning that into electricity through conventional generators,¡± explains Daniel Wise from Orbital Marine Power.

In one year, this turbine produced enough energy to power roughly 830 UK households.

One way that Orkney is dealing with this massive production of renewable energy is converting it into hydrogen, which is much more easily stored.

Click play to watch the video above to find out more.

***********

Austin Eubanks: Columbine school shooting survivor found dead
7 hours ago
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsColumbine High School massacre
A survivor of the Columbine High School shooting who later became a prominent advocate for fighting addiction has been found dead at his Colorado home.

Austin Eubanks, 37, was shot in the hand and knee in the 1999 Columbine attack, in which 12 of his classmates and a teacher were killed.

He became addicted to drugs after taking pain medication while recovering from his injuries.

Officials say there were no signs of foul play in his death.

Eubanks's body was discovered on Saturday at his home in Steamboats Springs, Colorado, Routt County Coroner Robert Ryg said.

A post-mortem examination to establish the cause of death was planned for Monday.

2018 'worst year for US school shootings'
Have US school shooting drills gone too far?
His family said he had "lost the battle with the very disease he fought so hard to help others face".

"As you can imagine, we are beyond shocked and saddened and request that our privacy is respected at this time," they added in a statement reported by local TV station KMGH.

Eubanks told the BBC in 2017 of how the attack, which killed his best friend, led him to addiction.

"I was medicated on a variety of substances that were intended to sedate and to relieve pain," he said.

"I became addicted before I even knew what was happening."

Eubanks later worked at an addiction treatment centre and travelled the US telling his story and working to improve addiction recovery and prevention.

The Columbine High School shooting took place on 20 April, 1999 when two students killed 12 fellow pupils and a teacher. They then killed themselves.

It was, at the time, the deadliest school shooting in US history.