World's most popular theme parks
Marnie Hunter, CNN ? Updated 30th May 2019

(CNN) ¡ª It's no surprise that Disney dominates among theme parks, and upcoming Star Wars land openings are likely to give the entertainment behemoth a big attendance boost.
That's according to the authors of the 2018 Theme Index and Museum Index, an attraction attendance report from the Themed Entertainment Association (TEA) and the Economics practice at AECOM.
Promoted by IHG Hotels and Resorts in Bali
Why Seminyak is the soul of 'New Bali'
With endless beaches and the lure of tradition, culture and non-stop relaxation, Bali is a dream destination for island lovers.
The most popular theme park in the world -- Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World in Lake Buena Vista, Florida -- welcomed 20.9 million visitors in 2018, a 2% increase in attendance from 2017, according to the report.
Of the world's 25 most-visited theme parks, a dozen are Disney properties.
And among the top 10 theme park groups worldwide, No. 1-ranked Walt Disney Attractions welcomed 157.3 million visitors in 2018.
By comparison, No. 2-ranked Merlin Entertainments Group welcomed fewer than half that number, with 67 million visitors in 2018, and No. 3-ranked Universal Parks and Resorts saw 50.1 million visitors.
"Looking ahead, we can expect that next year's numbers will likely show massive attendance impact for Disney in North America, from the 2019 openings of Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at Disneyland in May and at Walt Disney World in August," wrote report contributors Brian Sands and Kathleen LaClair of AECOM.
Related content
Louvre workers strike as museum declared world's most popular
Globally, all major markets saw a roughly 4% increase in theme park attendance in 2018.
About 252 million people visited the world's top 25 theme parks, up 3.3% from 2017.
For the first time ever, attendance at themed attractions operated by the major companies exceeded half a billion visits in 2018.
"This is equivalent to almost 7% of the world population," wrote John Robinett, senior vice president of economics at AECOM, in the report. "And not only that, but this number keeps growing. Just five years ago, the market capture of the industry was only 5% of the global population."
So for the millions who are planning or weighing a visit to a theme park this year, here are the world's most popular parks:

*****

America's 11 most endangered historic places
Katia Hetter, CNN ? Published 30th May 2019

(CNN) ¡ª Tourists love to visit the National Mall Tidal Basin in Washington, DC, but few know that the National Park Service site is threatened by rising sea levels and outdated infrastructure.
Visitors to Nashville's Music Row may not realize that many historic buildings where hits were produced are being demolished in favor of new development.
Promoted by IHG Hotels and Resorts in Bali
Why foodies flock to the shores of Bali for fresh seafood
With endless beaches and the lure of tradition, culture and non-stop relaxation, Bali is a dream destination for island lovers.
And sacred artifacts -- some dating back 8,000 years -- near Bears Ears and Canyons of the Ancients national monuments in Southeast Utah are being threatened by oil and gas extraction.
Although they're known for their historic significance, these spots are all in danger, according to the National Trust for Historic Preservation. That's why they're included among well-known and forgotten historic sites on the National Trust's 2019 list of America's 11 Most Endangered Historic Places.
The 32nd annual list includes a mix of historic and culturally important US sites threatened by forces from deferred maintenance and insensitive public policies to devastation wrought by natural disasters.
Related content
19 best places to travel for the summer of 2019
"We have published the annual 11 Most Endangered Historic Places list every year since 1988 to encourage people to get involved in saving threatened and irreplaceable historic treasures across America," said Katherine Malone-France, interim chief preservation officer of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
"This year, we're proud to include historic places that range from the archaeologically rich canyons of southeast Utah to iconic Post-Modern skyscrapers in downtown Chicago to the increasingly threatened National Mall Tidal Basin in America's Front Yard," she said.
"As it has since the first list, we look forward to how this 11 Most Endangered List will inspire Americans all over the country to get active, save these and other places in their communities, and not let today's historic treasure become tomorrow's profound regret."
The National Trust picks its sites carefully, looking for non-profit and community support working together to save importance places in their areas.
It's got a strong record: More than 300 places have been included on the list over the past three decades, and less than 5% of the list's sites have been lost during that time.