
It's official: We stare at our phone more than we stare at our TV
¡°Digital video time is essentially directly replacing traditional TV time,¡± said one market research expert.
Image: Commuters using mobile phones
Commuters use their mobile phones as they ride a subway train in New York on Aug. 1, 2018.Lucas Jackson / Reuters file
June 6, 2019, 3:53 AM GMT+8
By Andrew Kozak
For the first time, Americans are spending more time on their mobile devices than they are watching traditional television broadcasts, according to a new report by eMarketer.

¡°In 2019, U.S. adults will spend an average of three hours and 43 minutes on mobile devices daily,¡± the digital research firm reported, compared with approximately three hours and 35 minutes spent watching TV throughout the day.

Dominating this mobile consumption is the use of smartphones, accounting for 70 percent of the total time spent on mobile devices.

"It's about being an on-demand, always-on, always-with-me device that gives me what I want when I want it," said Kevin Lindsay, director of product marketing at Adobe, which recently conducted its own consumer study on digital content consumption. "There's no going back."

Just over 40 percent of Americans¡¯ daily digital video intake is now on mobile devices, with video the third most popular activity on these devices, behind audio and social networking.

However, mobile usage is not supplanting viewership of television content altogether. The rise in over-the-top streaming services has given networks the opportunity to capitalize on the growth in mobile consumption. Companies like Disney, WarnerMedia and NBCU have sold their content to streaming services like Hulu and Netflix and are establishing their own OTT services.

Between 2014 and 2019, OTT viewers have increased by 34 million people, whereas traditional television viewership has decreased by 12 million people, according to eMarketer.

Recommended


NOW
How bad for Huawei is the trade war?

NOW
A look inside China¡¯s social credit system
¡°Digital video time, which includes streaming video via any device (excluding video on social networks), is essentially directly replacing traditional TV time,¡± eMarketer reported. ¡°Adults¡¯ TV time will drop nine minutes this year, while digital video will jump by eight minutes.¡±

However, despite television¡¯s decrease and mobile¡¯s rise, TV remains a stronghold.

¡°In 2019, TV viewership across the total U.S. population will be 87 percent,¡± said Monica Peart, senior forecasting director at eMarketer. ¡°The vast majority of Americans still watch TV. Usage is stable ¡ª it is the frequency and time that have changed.¡±

However, while eMarketer projects that traditional television viewing will continue to fall, mobile growth is also projected to decline.

¡°We really have hit a saturation point," said Peart. "Those who want a mobile device in their pocket have one. We are running out of new people."

****
Tourist's lucky guess cracks safe code on first try
5 June 2019

A Canadian man unlocked a safe that had sat unopened in a small museum for decades, cracking the code on his first try with a lucky guess.

Stephen Mills was visiting the Vermilion Heritage Museum with his family when he had a go at opening the iron box "for a laugh".

The museum in the province of Alberta had previously tried numerous times to unlock the old safe - to no avail.

The safe had not been opened since the late 1970s.

The museum, housed in an old brick school building, hosts a collection on the history of Vermilion, a town of just over 4,000 people.

Mr Mills, from Fort McMurray, Alberta, was visiting Vermilion with his extended family during a long weekend in May.

"When we go camping every summer, we've come to learn that every small town, no matter where you go, has something to offer," he told the BBC.

So the family brought the children to see the museum and was given a tour by volunteer Tom Kibblewhite.

One of the exhibits was a safe that had originally been in the town's Brunswick Hotel, which had opened in 1906.

The safe itself is believed to have been bought in 1907.

It was donated to the museum in the early 1990s after the hotel changed ownership and was renovated.

Mr Mills said when they were shown the safe, the whole family "was intrigued".

How did he do it?
The museum had previously enlisted the help of experts to crack the code, tried default combinations, and had contacted former hotel employees to see if they could help.

Like the Mills family, other museum visitors played around with trying to open it, with no success.

Eccentric art inside London's The Museum of Everything
Banksy print stolen from Toronto exhibit by brazen thief
"I said to [Mr Kibblewhite]: 'that's a crazy time capsule. You don't even know what's in it,'" said Mr Mills, who works as a welder.

He noticed the dial numbers ran from zero to 60, and decided to try 20-40-60.

"Typical combination lock, three times clockwise - 20 - two times counterclockwise - 40 - once clockwise - 60, tried the handle and it went," he said.

"I could tell it wasn't opened for a long time because some dust fell out from the locking mechanism."

Mr Kibblewhite told the BBC "it was a thrill" when he turned and saw the door swinging open.

So what was in the safe?
Sadly no treasure. It contained an old pay sheet and part of a restaurant order pad, dating from the late 1970s.

The pad included receipts for a mushroom burger for C$1.50 ($1.12; ¡ê0.59) and a package of cigarettes for C$1.00.

"They have no value really, but they are of great interest to us. It gives us a little bit of idea of what the places were like in 1977, '78," said Mr Kibblewhite.

What are the chances?
The odds of Mr Mills correctly guessing the combination are pretty long, says the University of Toronto's Jeffrey Rosenthal, author of Knock on Wood: Luck, Chance, and the Meaning of Everything.

He calculated the chance of correctly guessing the combination on one try as 1 in 216,000. (His calculation assumed the safe numbers actually ran from one to 60).

But he noted that some combination locks allow for wiggle-room and if this one had a three-digit leeway, Mr Rosenthal put the chances at 1 in 8,000, "which is still a small chance".

The fact that the combination was in a specific pattern and did not appear to be a random combination of numbers could also factor into a calculation of the odds, he added.