Teacher fired for asking Trump to 'remove illegal students' from school
5 June 2019

A Texas school district has fired a high school teacher who tweeted to US President Donald Trump to ask for help reporting illegal immigrant students.

Georgia Clark, an English teacher in Fort Worth, complained on 17 May about "illegal students from Mexico", adding: "I need protection from recrimination".

She told school officials that she "did not realise the tweets were public," school officials wrote in a report.

Ms Clark was fired on Tuesday, but has 15 days to appeal the decision.

What exactly did she write?
The tweets, under her now-deleted @Rebecca1939 Twitter account, began about three weeks ago when she described the school district as "loaded with illegal students from Mexico", and suggested there should be someone at the school "who should be actively investigating & removing illegals that are in the public school system".

"Anything you can do to remove the illegals from Fort Worth would be greatly appreciated," she wrote in a separate tweet.

Ms Clark added that she needed guarantees that her identity would stay anonymous after action was taken, writing: "Texas will not protect whistle blowers. The Mexicans refuse to honour our flag."

But in another tweet, she posted her two phone numbers, adding: "Georgia Clark is my real name."

What has reaction been?
On Tuesday night the Fort Worth Independent School Board of Trustees unanimously voted to terminate her contract after several immigrants and immigrant rights groups spoke to the committee to condemn her actions.

During the meeting, 15 people spoke in support of her firing, according to the Fort Worth Star Telegram. Ms Clark was not present at the meeting.

Immigrant advocacy group United Fort Worth criticised Ms Clark as a teacher "who wants to turn classrooms into deportation zones."

In a statement after the vote, Superintendent Kent Scribner praised the board for their "strong record of supporting students and their quest for success, college, career and community leadership".

"Fort Worth serves 86,000 students, and it is our goal that we treat each one with dignity and respect, and based on the information that we have, we think this is the most responsible recommendation at this time."


Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionThe missing - consequences of Trump's immigration crackdown
A Facebook group called Fort Worth Republican Women, defended the teacher and lashed out officials who they said were violating her constitutional right to free speech.

"The students were offended by a teacher asking the President, Donald J Trump, to enforce the law so she's disciplined?" the group wrote.

"Would the same be true if another teacher supported illegal immigration?"

In 1982, the US Supreme Court ruled that public schools are required to teach children, regardless of their immigration status.

Schools are prohibited from asking parents about immigration status or reporting family members to authorities.

*****
Ultimate limit of human endurance found
By James Gallagher Health and science correspondent, BBC News
6 June 2019

The ultimate limit of human endurance has been worked out by scientists analysing a 3,000 mile run, the Tour de France and other elite events.

They showed the cap was 2.5 times the body's resting metabolic rate, or 4,000 calories a day for an average person.

Anything higher than that was not sustainable in the long term.

The research, by Duke University, also showed pregnant women were endurance specialists, living at nearly the limit of what the human body can cope with.

The study started with the Race Across the USA in which athletes ran 3,080 miles from California to Washington DC in 140 days.

Competitors were running six marathons a week for months, and scientists were investigating the effect on their bodies.

Image copyright Bryce Carlson
Image caption A Race Across the USA runner has his resting energy expenditure measured
Resting metabolic rate - the calories the body burns through when it is relaxing - was recorded before and during the race.

And calories burned in the extreme endurance event were recorded.

The study, in Science Advances, showed energy use started off high but eventually levelled off at 2.5 times the resting metabolic rate.

The study found a pattern between the length of a sporting event and energy expenditure; and that while running a marathon may be beyond many, it is nowhere near the limit of human endurance.

Marathon (just the one) runners used 15.6 times their resting metabolic rate
Cyclists during the 23 days of the Tour de France used 4.9 times their resting metabolic rate
A 95-day Antarctic trekker used 3.5 times the resting metabolic rate
"You can do really intense stuff for a couple of days, but if you want to last longer then you have to dial it back," Dr Herman Pontzer, from Duke University, told BBC News.

He added: "Every data point, for every event, is all mapped onto this beautifully crisp barrier of human endurance.

"Nobody we know of has ever pushed through it."

During pregnancy, women's energy use peaks at 2.2 times their resting metabolic rate, the study showed.

Image copyright Bryce Carlson
Image caption Runners on the 3,080 mile Race Across the USA in 2015.
The researchers argue the 2.5 figure may be down to the human digestive system, rather than anything to do with the heart, lungs or muscles.

They found the body cannot digest, absorb and process enough calories and nutrients to sustain a higher level of energy use.

The body can use up its own resources burning through fat or muscle mass - which can be recovered afterwards - in shorter events.

But in extreme events - at the limits of human exhaustion - the body has to balance its energy use, the researchers argue.

Dr Pontzer said the findings could eventually help athletes.

"In the Tour de France, knowing where your ceiling is allows you to pace yourself smartly.

"Secondly, we're talking about endurance over days and weeks and months, so it is most applicable to training regimens and thinking whether they fit with the long-term metabolic limits of the body."