US mum seeks mercy for dad who killed five children
11 June 2019

A US mother of five children who were killed by their father has asked a jury to spare him the death penalty.

Amber Kyzer told a court in South Carolina that Tim Jones Jr "did not show my children mercy by any means, but my kids loved him".

The 37-year-old was convicted in May of killing the siblings, aged one to eight, at his home near Lexington on 28 August 2014.

The jury is considering whether Jones should be executed or jailed for life.

"I hear what my kids went through and what they endured," Ms Kyzer said in court on Tuesday.

"And as a mother, if I could personally rip his face off I would.

"That's the mom in me. That's the mama bear."

Image copyright CBS
Image caption Timothy Ray Jones seen in a Lexington court on 4 June
Ms Kyzer told the jury she had opposed the death penalty for most of her life.

She said that despite at times hoping the legal system would "fry" her ex-husband she would not ultimately choose to sentence him to death.

"He did not show my children any mercy by any means," she said. "But my kids loved him and if I'm speaking on behalf of my kids and not myself, that's what I have to say."

Ms Kyzer added, however, that she would respect whatever decision the jury reached.

She was called to give evidence by Jones' defence lawyers.

The couple wed six weeks after meeting in 2004 when they both worked at a children's fun park in the Chicago area.

Image copyright CBS
Image caption Jones drove around aimlessly for nine days with the children's bodies in his car
But she testified in May that the marriage had turned sour because he became religiously strict, demanding that women were "to be seen and not heard".

When they divorced after nine years, she gave him custody of the children because he had an $80,000(¡ê63,000)-a-year-job as an Intel computer engineer and a car.

She saw the children every Saturday at a Chick-fil-A restaurant.

On the day Jones murdered the children, the court heard, he went berserk when he found six-year-old Nahtahn playing with a plug socket at their home.

He killed the boy and then decided to strangle the other four children, Elaine, one, Gabriel, two, Elias, seven, and Mera, eight.

Jones wrapped the bodies in plastic, the trial heard, put them in his sports utility vehicle and drove around for nine days before leaving the remains in rural Alabama.

He was arrested during a traffic stop in Mississippi when a police officer recognised "the smell of death" coming from the car.

Jones pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity.

The defence team say he was suffering from undiagnosed schizophrenia, a mental illness that afflicted his mother, too.

They argue he snapped when his wife left him for a teenager who lived next door.

******

Russian poker player dies from electrocution in bathroom
By Jack Guy, CNN

Updated 1608 GMT (0008 HKT) June 13, 2019
Novikova was a well-known online poker player.
(CNN)A Russian online poker player has been found dead after she was electrocuted while drying her hair.

The body of the 26-year-old was discovered in the bathroom of her flat in Moscow Tuesday, according to Russian state news agency TASS.
She was named by the news service as Lilya Novikova, a star in the world of online poker known to fans as Lia. "During the initial examination, traces of an electrical injury were found on the victim's body," a source told TASS.
Novikova's body was found by a neighbor, the government news service reported.
"Relatives became agitated when the girl stopped responding to phone calls and asked her neighbor to check on her. She found the girl's body," a law enforcement source told TASS.
A computer&#39;s newfound &#39;intuition&#39; beats world poker champs
A computer's newfound 'intuition' beats world poker champs
She regularly posted video streams on Twitch.tv, a live streaming platform popular among online gamers.
In addition to poker, Novikova was interested in rowing, boxing and archery.
Her Instagram account, on which Novikova describes herself as a "pro poker player," shows her snowboarding and swimming, as well as playing poker both online and in casinos.
Online poker is a huge business, with top players earning millions of dollars. However, new computer programs may put human players out of business.
In 2017 a program called DeepStack widely defeated 10 out of 11 professional poker players using a type of artificial intelligence its creators describe as "intuition."