Amazing New Non-Surgical Technique Lifts Years Off Your Face.
By Vanessa Mason, Beauty Headlines 
 02:06 GMT Wednesday Jun, 26th 2019 Amazing New Non-Surgical Technique Lifts Years Off Your Face.
Health & Welness  Wednesday Jun, 26th 2019  Comments 26

¡°I¡¯m 67, but my face is 50¡±, says Chicago grandmother.¡± 
"...I never had a single needle in my face¡­"

After an incredible summer, we all want to step into the Fall looking just as refreshed and as we feel. Sadly, as we age, this gets more and more difficult. With every passing year we all look a little more tired, a little more wrinkly and, yes ¨C older.

Women have been fighting the physical signs of the aging process since time immemorial, but one Chicago grandmother claims to have discovered something that can help her stay young without surgery or cosmetic injection needles.

When I met Martha in Chicago, she looked incredibly youthful and glamorous. I was told that she is older than she looks. After all, that was why I was interviewing her. But I was impressed with just how much.

She Looked At Least 20 Years Younger!

¡°How old do you think I am?¡± she teased.

I have to confess, I had no idea. She carried herself like a mature woman, with the wisdom and grace that comes with age, but the skin on her face looked so plump and youthful. She saw the confusion on my face, and decided to put me out of my misery.

¡°I¡¯m 67 years old.¡±

 Amazing New Non-Surgical Technique Lifts Years Off Your Face. ¡°Can I see some ID?¡± I joked, and she picked up her purse and produced her driving license. Sure enough, she really was born in 1950. I couldn¡¯t believe it. She had absolutely no slack in the contours of her face. Her eyes looked wide and youthful, and there were almost no lines around them. 

¡°You don¡¯t look like a woman who can remember the Moon landings¡± I said. ¡°Actually, you look like a woman who could barely remember the Reagan administration.¡±

¡°I¡¯ll take that as a compliment¡± she smiled. ¡°I often joke that I¡¯m 67 but my face is 50. But there¡¯s nothing special about me. Any woman can do the same if they knew where to start. With this... (she put her hand on her purse), it¡¯s practically a certainty.¡±

...What could actually erase those 20 years?
I asked her exactly what she did to look so young, and she continued.

¡°A couple years ago, I heard about a group of scientists from Geneva working on a new anti-aging ¡°complex¡± named Cosmedique - Ultra Concentrated Skin Rejuvenation. I¡¯m no scientist, so I can¡¯t tell you exactly what was that about, but here¡¯s how they explained it to me: 

They said that they have identified a method of delivering an anti-aging, skin revitalizing substance deep beneath the top layers of the skin without needles. It¡¯s actually very interesting. It was noticed for the first time when the team focused their work on a cure for the post-facial reconstruction scars therapy.""

I was quite impressed. Can this really be accomplished without any kind of needles or surgery?

¡°It¡¯s true¡± she said. ¡°I never had a single needle in my face. This is a pretty advanced product but you apply it topically just like any anti-aging or anti-wrinkle cream. The results however are nothing like anything that you¡¯ve ever tried¡± They¡¯ve engineered the formula the way where particles of some of the ingredients are small enough to penetrate and reach their specific, targeted layer of the skin. ¡±

¡°So how long did it take to notice the difference?¡±

"That¡¯s the beauty of it. After just eight weeks of using it, my skin was exactly as you see it today. And I was already starting to see major improvement after just about 10 days. ¡­Actually, I looked better immediately, because the formula contains something called ¡°The Lumi-Diffusion Technology¡± that breaks spectrum of the light and prevents shadows from forming inside the wrinkles. Softens their appearance right away (just like soft box lamps in photography)¡±


Our Take: I tried it for a week and noticed a difference in the texture of my complexion ¡ª it's softer and feels more hydrated even a few hours after I apply the cream. I love everything about it ¡ª the NO-SCENT, the consistency, the way it sinks into my skin. I apply it in the morning and again at night, as I noticed when I use it at night my skin is more supple and brighter the next day. It feels rich without being too thick and is absorbed instantly. It works great at keeping my skin hydrated and elastic.¡± ¡ª Vanessa Mason, Special Projects Editor