A teen is set to graduate from high school and Harvard within 11 days
By Gianluca Mezzofiore, CNN

Updated 5:31 PM ET, Tue May 21, 2019

(CNN)Braxton Moral walked across the stage Sunday at his high school in Ulysses, Kansas, as a newly-minted graduate.

Less than two weeks later, the 17-year-old is set on May 30 to mark another milestone: receiving his undergraduate degree from Harvard University.
Moral's parents enrolled him at the world-renowned institution when he was just 11, he told CNN.
"My parents noticed I was bored in school and needed something to inspire growth, so they ended up finding the Extension School," he said.
Harvard Extension School is mostly for nontraditional learners, be it someone with a job or who's not in the age range of a typical college student, Moral said.
Most courses can be taken online, but Extension School students also must earn 16 credit hours in person at the iconic campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts, said Moral, who majored in government with a minor in English. Moral is currently a degree candidate from the school, a Harvard University spokesman confirmed.
An extraordinary vocabulary and a stunning memory
Studying for both high school and Harvard at the same time wasn't easy, Moral said. But officials at his high school took a lot of the load off, allowing him to spend a couple hours each day working on Harvard's coursework, he said.
Moral has always been drawn to law and politics, and he's now hoping to go to law school, preferably at Columbia University, he said.
"I am, of course, excited to end this chapter of my life and anxious to begin the next," he said.
Moral's older sister, 29-year-old Brittney Jo Seger, told CNN her brother has always been talented.
"When he was little, his vocabulary was extraordinary," she said. "Something my mom, sister and I noticed early on was his memory. That's one of the things that makes him incredible. But he can look at anything or read anything, and he will instantly remember it forever."
"This didn't always benefit us older kids!" she joked.
Watching Moral walk across the stage during his first graduation was bittersweet, Seger said, because their parents couldn't be there due to their mother's health issues.
"My mother got a kidney transplant the week before, and my mother and father couldn't be there because of that. We are a very close family, so we gathered together to help honor him in such a special time," Seger said. "We can't wait for Harvard graduation next week and for Brax to start a new chapter in his life and focus on his love for politics."
Moral is also publishing a book, "Harvard in the Heartland," about his experience as "an intellectually gifted boy from a small farming town in Western Kansas," according to the book synopsis.

******
Shoe giants urge Trump to end trade war
BBC
Some of the world's biggest footwear firms are urging Donald Trump to end the US trade war with China, warning of a "catastrophic" effect on consumers.

In a letter signed by 173 companies, including Nike and Adidas, they said the President's decision to hike import tariffs to 25% will disproportionately impact the working class.

They also warn that higher levies threaten the future of some businesses.

"It is time to bring this trade war to an end," the firms urged.

Mr Trump increased levies on $200bn (¡ê157.3bn) worth of Chinese imports into the US from 10% to 25% more than a week ago after Washington and Beijing failed to reach a deal on trade.

China retaliated by announcing plans to raise levies on $60bn of US imports from 1 June.

US-China trade war: What could Beijing do next?
Who loses out in the US-China trade war?
The footwear companies that signed the letter, including Clarks, Dr Martens and Converse, claim that while the average US tariff on footwear is 11.3%, in some cases it can reach as high as 67.5%.

"Adding a 25% tax increase on top of these tariffs would mean some working American families could pay a nearly 100% duty on their shoes," the companies wrote.

"This is unfathomable."

When he raised tariffs earlier this month, Mr Trump told companies that they could reduce costs by shifting production to the US.

Skip Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump
China buys MUCH less from us than we buy from them, by almost 500 Billion Dollars, so we are in a fantastic position. Make your product at home in the USA and there is no Tariff. You can also buy from a non-Tariffed country instead of China. Many companies are leaving China.....

¡ª Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 14, 2019
Report
End of Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump
However, the shoemakers and retailers say that while they have been moving their sourcing away from China: "Footwear is a very capital-intensive industry, with years of planning required to make sourcing decisions, and companies cannot simply move factories to adjust to these changes."

The US and China are set to meet again to discuss trade at the G20 summit in Japan next month.

In the meantime, however, the US has increased pressure on China by declaring a national emergency to protect US computer networks from "foreign adversaries", affecting Huawei, the Chinese telecoms giant.