US synagogue shooting: One person dead in Poway, California
28 April 2019
Share
Image copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Police quickly sealed off the scene of the shooting in Poway
A gunman has opened fire at a synagogue in California, leaving one woman dead and three other people injured, police say.

A 19-year-old man has been arrested after the attack at Poway, north of the city of San Diego.

The synagogue had been hosting a Passover celebration when the shooting took place, reports said.

Police have not suggested a motive but US President Donald Trump said the attack "looks like a hate crime".

The shooting comes six months after a gun attack killed 11 people at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh. It was the worst anti-Semitic attack in recent US history.

America's gun culture in 10 charts
San Diego County Sheriff Bill Gore told reporters that investigators were reviewing the suspect's social media activity and examining an open letter published online.

Authorities later named him as John Earnest, the Associated Press reported, and said he was also under investigation in connection with a fire at a mosque last month.

"During the shooting, four individuals were wounded and transported to Palomar hospital," Sheriff Gore said. "One succumbed to their wounds. The other three are in stable condition."

Mayor Steve Vaus said the rabbi had been shot in the hand.

"For this to happen only a week later at the end of the Passover, only a week after Easter is horrific," he told MSNBC.

How did the attack happen?
Sheriff Gore said officers were called to the Chabad synagogue just before 11:30 (18:30 GMT) after the man opened fire with an "AR-15 type" assault rifle.

He said an off-duty border patrol officer fired at the suspect as he fled the scene in a vehicle, but did not hit him.

Image caption
The synagogue had been marking the final day of Passover
The suspect was later arrested by another officer, added San Diego chief of police David Nisleit.

"He clearly saw the suspect's vehicle, the suspect jumped out with his hands up and was immediately taken into custody." he said.

"As the officer was placing this 19-year-old male into custody, he clearly saw a rifle on the front passenger seat of the suspect vehicle."

What has the reaction been?
US Vice-President Mike Pence condemned the "evil and cowardly" shooting.

Skip Twitter post by @VP
We condemn in the strongest terms the evil & cowardly shooting at Chabad of Poway today as Jewish families celebrated Passover. No one should be in fear in a house of worship. Antisemitism isn¡¯t just wrong - it¡¯s evil. https://t.co/hkLOCf0anp

¡ª Vice President Mike Pence (@VP) April 27, 2019
Report
End of Twitter post by @VP
Speaking outside the White House, President Trump offered his "deepest sympathies".

"At this moment it looks like a hate crime, but my deepest sympathies to all those affected and we'll get to the bottom of it," he said.

Minoo Anvari, whose husband was inside the synagogue, told the local CNN affiliate that the congregation was "standing together" in the wake of the attack.

"We are strong. You can't break us," she said.

Democratic Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said on Twitter that she was "heartbroken" by the news.

**********

2019 Australia election: Morrison's coalition close to shock majority
2 hours ago
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsAustralia election 2019
Media captionScott Morrison: "I said I was going to burn for you, and I am"
Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is close to securing a majority government as the election's final results are being counted.

His conservative coalition has defied polls and is leading with 77 seats, the Australian Electoral Commission says. Only 76 are needed for a majority.

"I've always believed in miracles," Mr Morrison told supporters in his victory speech on Saturday night.

Exit polls had predicted a Labor Party win for the first time in six years.

Labor leader Bill Shorten resigned in the wake of his party's surprise defeat, telling members: "It is obvious that Labor will not be able to form the next government."

He will not seek re-election as party leader.

How Australia's PM forged a 'miracle' win
The election as it happened
Morrison: Australia's conservative pragmatist
The final result may not be known for some hours, but with more than 76% of votes counted the Liberal-National Coalition has won or is predicted to win 77 seats, with Labor trailing on 68 seats.

If the coalition fails to win an outright majority it will need the help of independent MPs to govern.

Media captionWhy Australia has had so many prime ministers
Australia has mandatory voting and a record 16.4 million voters enrolled for the election, which returns a new House of Representatives and just over half of the seats in the Senate.

Celebrating victory
In his victory speech on Saturday night, Mr Morrison paid tribute to "the quiet Australians" who voted for the coalition.

"It's been those Australians who have worked hard every day, they have their dreams, they have their aspirations, to get a job, to get an apprenticeship, to start a business, to meet someone amazing," he said.

"To start a family, to buy a home, to work hard and provide the best you can for your kids. To save for your retirement. These are the quiet Australians who have won a great victory tonight!"

Australia election results
Seats declared so far. 76 needed to win

With 76% counted
Source: ABC News
On Sunday morning, he joined a service at the Pentecostal Horizon Church in Sydney, where he thanked the congregation for their support.

"You don't get to be a prime minister and serve in that capacity unless you first are a member of your local electorate."

He later watched his team, the Cronulla Sharks, play a rugby league match, drawing cheers from the crowd.

Why was the election important?
Australia holds elections every three years but, with infighting rife, no prime minister has succeeded in serving a full term since 2007.

Mr Morrison said he had united his government - a coalition between his Liberal Party and its traditional ally, the National Party - in the nine months since he replaced Malcolm Turnbull as prime minister.

Media captionWhy Australians get fined if they don't turn up to vote
Surveys showed that the economy, cost of living, environment and health were central concerns for voters, while younger people in particular voiced frustration about climate change and a lack of affordable housing.

Mr Morrison campaigned primarily on economic issues, often doing so alone while painting the election as a choice between himself and Mr Shorten.

Mr Shorten promised to cut tax breaks for the wealthy and to lower greenhouse gas emissions.

How Australia is changing - in 11 charts
The vote that spans outback to Antarctica
10 things to know about Australia's election
There were fierce debates about the rolling leadership turmoil, formal recognition of indigenous Australians, and the treatment of female MPs in parliament.

"I think people have become afraid after a very negative campaign," Labor supporter Julie Nelson told Reuters at the party's Melbourne election night function. "They [the Liberals] managed to convince people they should be afraid of change."