Seniors Turn Back The Clock On Aging Feet With New 'Wonder' Insole


george
Reid Davis

May 4, 2019

running
Lately, I feel like my whole life has grinded to a halt. I haven¡¯t been able to do any of the things I like to do, like biking, exercising, or even just plain taking a walk.

The reason? I¡¯ve been having horrendous, debilitating foot pain. Now, I¡¯ve had pain for the last 20 years or so, but recently it¡¯s really amped up. I was recently diagnosed with Plantar Fasciitis, and I gotta tell you, I¡¯ve been having trouble even getting up out of bed in the morning. And I¡¯m only 42!

The last couple weeks, I¡¯ve been scouring the internet for remedies, trying everything to find relief. I even enrolled in physical therapy. But nothing was really helping. That is, until I was told about a new technology that¡¯s been working wonders for my feet.

My buddy Larry has been doing marathons for years now. That in and of itself is an amazing feat, but here¡¯s the kicker¡­

Larry¡¯s 74 years old!

He signed up for his first marathon right after he retired. He said it was the only thing that was going to motivate him to actually get off the couch! (Larry¡¯s an all-or-nothing kind of guy, if you can¡¯t tell.)

Well, six months later, he crossed that finish line, and it¡¯s been off to the races ever since¡­ literally!

But about a year ago, something stopped him right in his tracks.
He was having the same trouble I was¡­ terrible foot pain!

For the first time since retiring¡­ he was forced to miss a marathon!

That was it. Larry decided he wasn¡¯t going to be a victim. So he visited some of the top specialists around. And you won¡¯t believe what they told him¡­

One of the specialists told him about a brand-new product called MindInsole, which helps heal foot pain and get you living life again!

Just a few months later, Larry crossed yet another finish line. And now, he swears up and down by MindInsole. I know Larry is a stand-up guy, and when he gives his word to something, he means it.

To be honest, I was a bit skeptical that this was going to be the answer to my plantar fasciitis. But I had nothing to lose, so I started doing research on MindInsole.

What is it?
MindInsole is designed to ease your pain and get you up on your feet again. It specifically helps with plantar fasciitis, heel pain, and swollen feet.


After toiling away on his massaging insoles for four years, the inventor of MindInsole revealed this amazing product to the world in June of 2017 to the acclaim of many in the podiatric community.

How Does it Work?
How is it that a ¡°simple¡± insole can completely relieve tension and eliminate foot pain?

Simple. MindInsole is a scientifically designed insole that uses more than 400 massage points on each foot to promote blood flow and relieve muscle tension. Though no one outside the company knows the secret to this brand-new technology, we do know that it¡¯s basically like giving your feet a continuous massage, even while you¡¯re walking, running, standing, or sitting.

People with plantar fasciitis have been wearing it while they sleep, and say they¡¯re waking up to no pain at all!

MindInsole promotes blood flow that carries away de-oxygenated blood cells and toxins, while bringing new, healthy blood back into the foot.

Millions of people, especially those with foot pain and senior citizens, have been reaping the therapeutic benefits of MindInsole. Due to its curative qualities and ease of use, it¡¯s become a premiere product for foot pain relief.

Who is benefitting from MindInsole?
People across the country, from all walks of life, are loving MindInsole. Whether you¡¯re a senior citizen or active and on your feet all day, or just want to have some extra comfort in your daily routine, MindInsole is universally embraced by millions of people!

Seniors
Sufferers of Foot Pain
Those with Plantar Fasciitis
Those with Heel pain
People with Varicose Veins
Those who need better circulation
Those with swollen feet
Servers
Joggers
Teachers
Doctors
Dog Walkers
Laborers
Hikers
And Anybody Else
But¡­ Is it Really Worth All This Hype?
Since its debut, MindInsole has been in a state of constant flux, shifting between IN STOCK to SOLD OUT nearly every other week, and it¡¯s also amassed tons of loyal followers¡ªfrom athletes and seniors to everyday working people.

Mindinsole has easily developed a cult following. Here are some customer reviews:
A Prenatal Dream (Swollen Feet)

"I never knew how painful the swelling in my legs and feet could be until recently, and these insoles were a complete game changer. I stand for over nine hours a day at work, so I can't begin to explain how badly my legs and feet ached. I have a picture of what my feet looked like after using MindInsole (right) and before using MindInsole. The difference is tremendous!"

feet
I wanted to get a scientific take on the healing powers of MindInsole, so we talked to podiatrist Dr. Linda Smith to see if the hype was justified. Here¡¯s her take:
¡°Yes, it¡¯s a comprehensive and long-lasting answer to foot pain. MindInsole promotes healthy blood flow. Furthermore, it acts as a buttress for the entire inferior of the foot¡ªfrom toe to heel. It quickens recovery from foot injuries like plantar fasciitis."

Smith continued: ¡°I urge all of my elderly patients to use MindInsole; not only to alleviate pain, but as a preventative measure to nip future pains in the bud. Really, everyone with a semi-active lifestyle should be using these everyday. They provide support, comfort, and protection against wear and tear.¡±

¡°If more people wore these, I¡¯d lose a lot of my patients. They simply secure the well-being of your feet.¡±

img-1
After Dr. Smith¡¯s endorsement, I was sold and needed to try MindInsole for myself.
Are you ready to find out if this can work for you? Keep reading to find out about a special offer!

I went to their website and ordered a few pairs of MindInsole. From the smooth, expedient shipping process (the package reached me in just five days) to my first run with the insoles, I was impressed.

My Personal 30-Day Timeline of Healing my Foot Pain:
I¡¯m always thorough, so during my journey to healing, I kept a journal detailing what I was experiencing.

DAY 1
Just tried them on and really like the feel! Even though you can feel the tightness around your foot, it¡¯s not an uncomfortable tightness! In fact, I think they¡¯re the opposite! They¡¯re really comfortable. I like it!

DAY 2
I made it up and over ¡°The Hill¡± (it¡¯s in my neighborhood) THREE TIMES before I felt any foot pain today! Normally, I¡¯m aching on the first climb! Woohoo!

End of Week 1
My feet feel amazing! I¡¯ve started wearing a pair of insoles at night, and I think it¡¯s really benefitting me! I haven¡¯t felt much pain AT ALL the last two days! It¡¯s especially nice to wake up in the morning without agonizing pain in your feet.

One Month
Whelp, the pain¡¯s completely gone! I almost forget what it¡¯s like to have foot pain (Almost!). And, there have been some unexpected side effects (good ones). My posture¡¯s noticeably improved, to the point where my kids even noticed. I have WAY more energy now (I climbed ¡°The Hill¡± SIX TIMES yesterday!). These things have seriously changed my life!


Today, I am pleased to say that I am now able to run again without pain. My feet were normally knotted and sore after a long-distance run; to the point where I have to stretch and massage them for hours to treat the pain. I have just completed a 10-mile run wearing MindInsole, and my feet felt like they¡¯d been nuzzled by pillows instead of treading on pavement for over an hour¡ªzero foot pain.

MindInsole continues to serve me well and keep my feet happy, so I gifted my dad a pair (he¡¯s arthritic and poorly from the early stages on Parkinson¡¯s). He¡¯s often incapacitated from leg pain. When he does move, he dodders and plods. It¡¯s a struggle.

With the help of MindInsole (and maybe a dash of magic)¡ªbelieve it or not¡ªhe was dancing like a studly 20-something at my wedding! It was like time travel¡ªit was an emotional sight that inspired him and our family. He¡¯s been more mobile and joyful since.

dancing
Now, how much does it cost?
Before I¡¯d heard of MindInsole, I was going to the masseuse specifically for foot massages about every other week. It was the only way I knew to deal with my pain (I¡¯m a runner, and it takes its toll).

The masseuse charges $90 per session, or $180 per month at my rate! Can you believe I was paying more than $2,000/year just to relieve my foot pain!?

But luckily, I was able to get a special discount (which I¡¯ll share with you later) and I got THREE pairs of insoles for just $39.95!

Was it worth the price?
In one word: Absolutely. I mean, just think about it. With the price I was paying for massages, I could have bought 50 pairs for the same price!

Except before, I¡¯d start to feel some foot pain before my massage appointment. But now, by wearing the insoles either at night or through the day, my foot pain has been completely eliminated.

And there¡¯s something just¡­comforting about them, too. I love the way they hug my foot, the tightness just feels so good. My vote¡¯s in¡­ and I¡¯m 100% FOR MindInsole.

Also, you really have nothing to lose because MindInsole offers a 100% Money Back Guarantee.

Suffice to say, MindInsole comes with my highest approval. This product has been more than a ¡°game changer¡± for many people. It¡¯s been a life changer.