restaurant to spend more time with family
Francesca Street, CNN ? Updated 8th May 2019
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(4)
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(3)
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(1)
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(2)
1/4
Michelin-starred restaurant to close: Chef Magnus Nilsson has announced that he's planning to close his two Michelin-starred restaurant F?viken in Sweden.
Courtesy F?viken Magasinet
(CNN) ¡ª Two Michelin-starred restaurant F?viken, located roughly 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Swedish capital Stockholm, is one of Europe's most in-demand eateries.
But now chef Magnus Nilsson has become the latest Michelin-starred restaurateur to announce he's shutting up shop because he's had enough.
"This coming season will be my last at F?viken Magasinet," wrote Nilsson on his Instagram account.
The chef says December 14, 2019, will be the last business day. Instead of working, he says he plans to spend his time with family, fishing, gardening and getting fit, "both physically and mentally."
New chapter
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(2)
F?viken is located north of Stockholm, in Sweden.
Courtesy F?viken Magasinet
A Michelin star is often seen as a crowing achievement for a chef, but Nilsson isn't the first who has turned his back on the accolade.
In September 2018, rural Checkers restaurant in Wales announced its plans to give back its Michelin star and reopen in a more low-key iteration.
And in October 2017, Restaurant Andre, a top Singaporean dining spot, returned its two Michelin stars, with chef-patron Andre Chiang explaining he wanted to focus on other projects.
Meanwhile, French chef S¨¦bastien Bras asked Michelin to take away his 3 stars in September 2017.
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(3)
F?viken is known for its locally grown and sourced menu.
Courtesy F?viken Magasinet
Related content
UK restaurant The Checkers gives back its Michelin star
Chiang, Bras and the Checkers team all said they felt an increasing exhausted under the pressure of running a prestigious establishment.
Its a sentiment Nilsson shares.
"I am not going to lie, I am a little bit tired after all this time pushing the development of the restaurant forward," he said.
The 35-year-old chef has been running F?viken for 10 years, during which time it's become wildly successful, featuring on TV cookery programs and spawning cookbooks.
The restaurant seats just 24 people and showcases local produce in a creative way. Nilsson is responsible for growing and hunting many of his ingredients.
After enjoying the 3,300 kronor ($345) seasonal tasting menu, diners can also stay overnight in the restaurant's six rooms.
Related content
10 hotels with Michelin-starred restaurants
Creative freedom
Magnus-Nilsson-Faviken-(1)
F?viken showcases creative dining.
Courtesy F?viken Magasinet
The coming season at F?viken is all booked up -- so unless diners already have a reservation, they'll miss out on the Nilsson experience.
"I have been allowed to grow and develop, and I have enjoyed complete creative freedom," says Nilsson.
The chef says it's not an easy decision to close his passion project, but he believes "it's the right one."