Julian Assange: Sweden to announce decision on rape case

Swedish prosecutors are set to announce whether they are reopening an inquiry into a rape allegation against Wikileaks co-founder Julian Assange.

The investigation may be revived at the request of the alleged victim's lawyer.

Assange, who denies the charges, has avoided extradition to Sweden for seven years after seeking refuge at the Ecuadorean embassy in London in 2012.

But the 47-year-old was evicted last month and sentenced to 50 weeks in jail for breaching his bail conditions.

The US also wants to extradite Assange from the UK over his alleged role in the release of classified military and diplomatic material in 2010.

What happens now?
On Monday, Sweden's deputy director of public prosecutions, Eva-Marie Persson, will announce her decision on whether to revisit the sexual assault investigation after it was dropped two years ago.

Swedish prosecutors said at the time they felt they were unable to take the case forward while Assange was inside the Ecuadorean embassy.

However, the woman who made the allegation now wants the case reopened, and since Assange's arrest last month - Ecuador abruptly withdrew its protection and invited the police to arrest him - Swedish prosecutors have been considering their options.

Under Swedish law, they have until next year to pursue the case. If they do re-open the investigation, it is likely to raise the question of which extradition request should take precedence: that of Sweden or the US.

Profile: Julian Assange
Timeline: Julian Assange saga
How likely is an Assange conviction in US?
Australian-born Assange faces a charge of conspiracy to commit computer intrusion in the US. He is accused of participating in one of the largest ever leaks of government secrets, which could result in a prison term of up to five years.

After his dramatic arrest last month, he was taken to Westminster Magistrates' Court and found guilty of a British charge of breaching bail. He is currently being held at Belmarsh prison in London.

The United Nations has called for his right to a fair trial to be respected during any extradition process.


Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionVideo footage shows Julian Assange being dragged from the Ecuadorian embassy in London
What is the Swedish investigation about?
Assange was accused of rape and other sexual offences against two women following a Wikileaks conference in Stockholm in 2010. He has always denied the allegations, saying the sex was consensual.

He also faced investigations for molestation and unlawful coercion, but these cases were dropped in 2015 because time had run out.

Prosecutors have been re-examining the rape case to decide whether to resume it before the statute of limitations expires in August 2020.

The alleged victim's lawyer, Elizabeth Massi Fritz, said Assange's arrest came as a shock but "what we have been waiting and hoping for since 2012 has now finally happened".

She said: "No rape victim should have to wait nine years to see justice be served."

How does the extradition process work?
Lawyer Rebecca Niblock said the extradition decision lies primarily with the courts and that only a judge can decide whether an extradition breaches an individual's human rights.

The home secretary can consider a limited number of issues when deciding whether or not to order an extradition, including whether the person is at risk of the death penalty.

However, if Sweden made an extradition request, Ms Niblock said it would be for the home secretary to decide which request would take precedence, considering factors such as the seriousness of the offence and which request was made first.

Nick Vamos, former head of extradition at the Crown Prosecution Service, said the UK proceedings should not take more than 18 months.

Considering Assange's potential objections to extradition, Mr Vamos said that he did not think courts would accept the US case was politically motivated.

But he said Assange may be able to argue that his likely treatment in the US prison system would breach his human rights and that could not receive a fair trial due to his notoriety and links to political scandals.

**********

North Korean women 'forced into sex slavery' in China - report
20 May 2019
Share
Image copyrightKOREA FUTURE INITIATIVE
Image caption
The trade of North Korean women in China is said to be worth $100m a year for criminal organisations
Thousands of North Korean women and girls are being forced to work in the sex trade in China, according to a new report by a London-based rights group.

They are often abducted and sold as prostitutes, or compelled to marry Chinese men, says the Korea Future Initiative.

The trade is worth $100m (¡ê79m) a year for criminal organisations, it says.

The women are often trapped because China repatriates North Koreans, who then face torture at home, it says.

"Victims are prostituted for as little as 30 Chinese yuan ($4.30; ¡ê3.40), sold as wives for just 1,000 yuan, and trafficked into cybersex dens for exploitation by a global online audience," the report's author Yoon Hee-soon said.

The North Korean women who had to escape twice
Sexual abuse of women 'common' in N Korea
The girls and women in question are usually aged between 12 and 29, but can sometimes be younger, the report said.

They are coerced, sold, or abducted in China or trafficked directly from North Korea. Many are sold more than once and are forced into at least one form of sexual slavery within a year of leaving their homeland, it adds.

Many are enslaved in brothels in districts in north-east China with large migrant worker populations.

The girls - some as young as nine - and women working in the cybersex industry are forced to perform sex acts and are sexually assaulted in front of webcams. Many of the subscribers are thought to be South Korean.

Women forced into marriage were mostly sold in rural areas for 1,000 to 50,000 yuan, and were raped and abused by their husbands.

Media captionNorth Korean defectors who had to escape twice
The group collected its information from victims in China and exiled survivors in South Korea.

One woman, named as Ms Pyon from Chongjin City, North Korea, is quoted as saying in the report:

"I was sold [to a brothel] with six other North Korean women at a hotel. We were not given much food and were treated badly...After eight months, half of us were sold again. The broker did bad things to me."

North Korea's sidelined human rights crisis
Rape and no periods in North Korea's army
"When I arrived [at the new brothel] I had bruises on my body. [The broker] was beaten then stabbed in the legs by some members of the gang."

Another, Ms Kim, said: "There are many South Koreans [in Dalian, China]...We put advertising cards under their doors [in hotels]...The cards are in the Korean-language and advertise what we offer...We are mostly taken to bars [by the pimp].

"South Korean companies want [North Korean prostitutes] for their businessmen...Prostitution was my first experience of meeting a South Korean person."