Alabama passes bill banning abortion
15 May 2019

Pro-choice activists protested outside Alabama's state capital during the debate
Alabama lawmakers have passed a bill to outlaw abortion outright in the state, set to be the strictest such US law.

The state Senate approved the law, rejecting an amendment to allow exemptions for cases of rape or incest.

It will now go to Republican Governor Kay Ivey. She has not said whether she will sign it, but she is seen as a strong opponent of abortion.

Activists hope it will challenge a landmark 1973 Supreme Court ruling that legalised abortion in the US.

How US abortion debate got to this point
What's behind Georgia's anti-abortion 'heartbeat bill'?
The bill had been passed 74-3 earlier this month in Alabama's House of Representatives.

Abortion would be only be allowed in certain circumstances to safeguard the mother's health.

Image caption
Senator Clyde Chambliss is ready to challenge Roe v Wade
What are the politicians saying about the new law?
Republican lawmaker Terri Collins, sponsor of the legislation, said: "Our bill says that baby in the womb is a person."

Democratic state Senator Bobby Singleton said the bill "criminalises doctors" and is an attempt by men "to tell women what to do with their bodies".

Republican Senator Clyde Chambliss, a backer of the law, said it would enable the state "to go directly to the Supreme Court to challenge Roe versus Wade", the 1973 ruling that established a woman's right to an abortion.

Before the debate began, Democrat Rodger Smitherman said: "We're telling a 12-year-old girl who, through incest and rape is pregnant, we are telling her that she doesn't have a choice."

US state's abortion law fuels boycott call
What US ruling may mean for Roe v Wade
The women looking outside the law for abortions
What does the bill do?
It goes further than legislation passed recently elsewhere in the US to ban abortion after a foetal heartbeat can be detected, usually around six weeks into a pregnancy.

Under the Alabama measure, provision of abortion at any stage in pregnancy would be a class A felony.

Doctors could face 10 years in prison for attempting to terminate a pregnancy and 99 years for actually carrying out the procedure.

A woman who has an abortion would not be held criminally liable.

The bill would allow abortion in cases where the mother's life is at serious risk.

Its text says more foetuses have been aborted than people killed in "Stalin's gulags, Cambodian killing fields".

Image caption
An anti-abortion activist in Philadelphia
Why now?
Supporters of the legislation have welcomed an inevitable challenge in federal court if the measure becomes law. Pro-choice groups have pledged to take legal action against it.

The bill's architects expect it will be defeated in the lower courts, but hope it will end up before the Supreme Court.

Their aim ultimately is to overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling that recognised a woman's constitutional right to end a pregnancy.

Emboldened by the addition of two Trump-nominated conservative justices, anti-abortion activists are eager to take one of the most divisive issues in America back to the highest court in the land.

Eric Johnston, founded the Alabama Pro-Life Coalition that helped draft the bill, told NPR: "The dynamic has changed.

"The judges have changed, a lot of changes over that time, and so I think we're at the point where we need to take a bigger and a bolder step."

What's the national picture?
If signed into the law by Governor Ivey, the Alabama measure would become one of more than 300 laws challenging abortion access in the US.

Its passage comes amid a wave of anti-abortion measures in Republican-controlled state capitols around the nation.

Legislation to restrict abortion has been introduced in 16 of America's 50 states this year alone, according to the Guttmacher Institute, which advocates for more abortion access.

The flurry of measures has led these activists to warn that a swathe of US territory could become an "abortion desert."

At the other end of the political spectrum, a Democratic-sponsored bill in Virginia that would have allowed third-trimester abortions up until the point of childbirth failed to make it out of committee.

**************

San Francisco is first US city to ban facial recognition
By Dave Lee
North America technology reporter
15 May 2019
Share
Image copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
High-definition cameras "map" faces in a crowd and compare them to existing images
Legislators in San Francisco have voted to ban the use of facial recognition, the first US city to do so.

The emerging technology will not be allowed to be used by local agencies, such as the city¡¯s transport authority, or law enforcement.

Additionally, any plans to buy any kind of new surveillance technology must now be approved by city administrators.

Opponents of the measure said it will put people¡¯s safety at risk and hinder efforts to fight crime.

Those in favour of the move said the technology as it exists today is unreliable, and represented an unnecessary infringement on people¡¯s privacy and liberty.

In particular, opponents argued the systems are error prone, particularly when dealing with women or people with darker skin.

Student says Apple AI led to false arrest
Amazon defends facial-recognition tool
Police face recognition tools 'inaccurate'
"With this vote, San Francisco has declared that face surveillance technology is incompatible with a healthy democracy and that residents deserve a voice in decisions about high-tech surveillance," said Matt Cagle from the American Civil Liberties Union in Northern California.

"We applaud the city for listening to the community, and leading the way forward with this crucial legislation. Other cities should take note and set up similar safeguards to protect people's safety and civil rights."

The vote was passed by San Francisco¡¯s supervisors 8-1, with two absentees. The measure is expected to be officially passed into city law after a second vote next week.

Image caption
The move angered campaigners who said the tech would help fight crime
"Instead of an outright ban, we believe a moratorium would have been more appropriate," said Joel Engardio, vice-president of Stop Crime SF.

"We agree there are problems with facial recognition ID technology and it should not be used today. But the technology will improve and it could be a useful tool for public safety when used responsibly. We should keep the door open for that possibility."

The new rules will not apply to security measures at San Francisco¡¯s airport or sea port, as they are run by federal, not local, agencies.

Some campaigners unsuccessfully urged for the measures not to apply to local police. While San Francisco¡¯s officers do not currently use facial recognition technology, a number of other police forces across the US do.